.\" https://man.openbsd.org/mdoc.7
.Dd 2026-03-22
.Dt VAYDNS-CLIENT 1
.Os


.Sh NAME

.Nm vaydns-client
.Nd DNS tunnel client


.Sh SYNOPSIS

.Nm
.Op Fl doh Ar URL | Fl dot Ar HOST : Ns Ar PORT | Fl udp Ar HOST : Ns Ar PORT
.Op Fl pubkey Ar HEX | Fl pubkey-file Ar FILENAME
.Fl domain Ar DOMAIN
.Fl listen Ar LOCALADDR : Ns Ar LOCALPORT


.Sh DESCRIPTION

.Nm
is the client portion of a DNS tunnel.
It receives TCP connections at the address given by
.Fl listen
and forwards them,
encoded as a sequence of DNS messages
and via a recursive resolver,
to an instance of
.Xr vaydns-server 1
running as the authoritative name server for the domain given by
.Fl domain .
The DNS messages may be carried over
DNS over HTTPS,
DNS over TLS,
or plaintext DNS over UDP.
The client automatically reconnects with exponential backoff
when a session fails.

.Ss TRANSPORT

You must use exactly one of the
.Fl doh ,
.Fl dot ,
or
.Fl udp
options,
to specify what form of DNS to use:

.Bl -tag

.It Fl doh Ar URL
Use DNS over HTTPS.
.Ar URL
is the URL of the DNS over HTTPS resolver,
including the
.Ql /dns-query
path if used by the resolver.

.It Fl dot Ar HOST : Ns Ar PORT
Use DNS over TLS.
.Ar HOST
and
.Ar PORT
are the TCP address of the DNS over TLS resolver.
.Ar PORT
is normally 853.

.It Fl udp Ar HOST : Ns Ar PORT
Use plaintext DNS over UDP.
.Ar HOST
and
.Ar PORT
are the UDP address of the DNS resolver.
.Ar PORT
is normally 53.

.Pp
By default, each DNS query is sent from a fresh UDP socket with a
randomized source port, making the tunnel harder to fingerprint.
Use
.Fl udp-shared-socket
to revert to a single shared socket.

.Pp
With
.Fl udp ,
you have the option of communicating directly with an instance of
.Xr vaydns-server 1 ,
without going through a recursive resolver.

.El

.Ss AUTHENTICATION

You must use one of the
.Fl pubkey
or
.Fl pubkey-file
options to specify the public key used
for authenticating the server and encrypting the channel.
The public key should have been generated by
.Ql vaydns-server -gen-key .
.Xr vaydns-server 1
prints its public key at the beginning of its log output.

.Bl -tag

.It Fl pubkey Ar HEX
.Ar HEX
is a string of 64 hexadecimal digits.

.It Fl pubkey-file Ar FILENAME
.Ar FILENAME
is the name of a file containing
64 hexadecimal digits and an
optional trailing newline character.

.El


.Sh OPTIONS


.Bl -tag

.It Fl domain Ar DOMAIN
Tunnel domain.
Required.

.It Fl listen Ar ADDR
Local TCP address to listen on for incoming connections.
Required.

.It Fl idle-timeout Ar DURATION
Session idle timeout.
If no data is received from the server within this period,
the session is considered dead and the client reconnects.
Must match the server's
.Fl idle-timeout .
Default:
.Cm 10s
(or
.Cm 2m
with
.Fl dnstt-compat ) .

.It Fl keepalive Ar DURATION
Keepalive ping interval.
Must be less than
.Fl idle-timeout .
Must match the server's
.Fl keepalive .
Default:
.Cm 2s
(or
.Cm 10s
with
.Fl dnstt-compat ) .

.It Fl max-streams Ar N
Maximum concurrent streams per session.
0 means unlimited.
Default:
.Cm 0 .

.It Fl open-stream-timeout Ar DURATION
Timeout for opening an smux stream.
Default:
.Cm 10s .

.It Fl session-check-interval Ar DURATION
How often the managed client checks whether the current session and
transport are still healthy.
Default:
.Cm 500ms .

.It Fl open-stream-failure-limit Ar N
Retire an idle session after
.Ar N
consecutive stream-open failures.
Default:
.Cm 3 .

.It Fl reconnect-min Ar DURATION
Initial backoff delay before retrying session creation.
Default:
.Cm 1s .

.It Fl reconnect-max Ar DURATION
Maximum backoff delay.
Must be >= reconnect-min.
Default:
.Cm 30s .

.It Fl rps Ar N
Rate limit outgoing DNS queries to
.Ar N
per second.
Uses a token bucket with 1-second burst allowance.
0 means unlimited.
Default:
.Cm 0 .

.It Fl max-qname-len Ar N
Maximum total QNAME length in wire format.
0 means the RFC 1035 maximum of 253.
Shorter values improve compatibility with restrictive resolvers
but reduce upstream throughput.
Default:
.Cm 101
(or
.Cm 253
with
.Fl dnstt-compat ) .

.It Fl max-num-labels Ar N
Maximum number of data labels in the query name before the tunnel domain.
0 means unlimited.
1 produces the most DNS-like queries.
Default:
.Cm 0 .

.It Fl udp-workers Ar N
Number of concurrent UDP worker goroutines.
Only applies when using
.Fl udp
without
.Fl udp-shared-socket .
Default:
.Cm 100 .

.It Fl udp-timeout Ar DURATION
Per-query UDP response timeout.
Only applies when using
.Fl udp
without
.Fl udp-shared-socket .
Default:
.Cm 500ms .

.It Fl poll-delay Ar DURATION
Base delay before sending an empty DNS poll when idle.
Default:
.Cm 500ms .

.It Fl active-poll-delay Ar DURATION
Polling delay cap while streams are active or being opened.
Default:
.Cm 200ms .

.It Fl poll-max-delay Ar DURATION
Maximum idle backoff between empty DNS polls.
Default:
.Cm 2s .

.It Fl udp-transport-stale-timeout Ar DURATION
Retire the current session if per-query UDP sees no valid response for
this long while streams need transport.
Only applies when using
.Fl udp
without
.Fl udp-shared-socket .
Default:
.Cm 3s .

.It Fl udp-shared-socket
Use a single shared UDP socket instead of per-query sockets.
Disables the randomized source port behavior.
When set,
.Fl udp-workers ,
.Fl udp-timeout ,
and
.Fl udp-accept-errors
are ignored.

.It Fl udp-accept-errors
Accept DNS error responses (SERVFAIL, NXDOMAIN, REFUSED) instead of
dropping them as forged.
By default, error responses are silently dropped
and the worker keeps waiting for a valid response until
.Fl udp-timeout .

.It Fl utls Oo
.Op Ar weight Ns Sy * Ns
.Ar label
.Oc Ns Op , Ns ...
Set the weighted distribution of TLS fingerprints.

.Pp
.Nm
uses
.Lk https://github.com/refraction-networking/utls "uTLS"
to disguise its TLS fingerprint.
By default, a fingerprint is selected randomly from a weighted distribution.
The special value
.Cm random
stands for a randomized fingerprint.
The special value
.Cm none
disables uTLS and uses the native Go crypto/tls fingerprint.
Use
.Fl help
to see all available fingerprint names.

.It Fl dnstt-compat
Enable original dnstt wire protocol compatibility.
Encodes packets in the original dnstt format (8-byte ClientID, padding
prefixes) for connecting to a dnstt server.
Also overrides the following defaults to match dnstt unless explicitly set:
.Fl max-qname-len
to 253,
.Fl idle-timeout
to 2m,
.Fl keepalive
to 10s.
When set, the
.Fl clientid-size
option is ignored.

.It Fl clientid-size Ar N
Set the ClientID size in bytes.
Default:
.Cm 2 .
Ignored when
.Fl dnstt-compat
is set.

.It Fl queue-size Ar N
Packet queue size for the transport and DNS layers.
Default:
.Cm 512 .

.It Fl kcp-window-size Ar N
KCP send and receive window size in packets.
0 means half of
.Fl queue-size .
Default:
.Cm 0 .

.It Fl queue-overflow Ar MODE
Queue overflow behavior:
.Cm drop
or
.Cm block .
Default:
.Cm drop .

.It Fl log-level Ar LEVEL
Log level: debug, info, warning, error.
Default:
.Cm info .

.El


.Sh EXAMPLES

Tunnel through the DNS over HTTPS resolver at
.Cm https://resolver.example/dns-query
to the authoritative name server for
.Cm t.example.com .
Listen locally at
.Cm 127.0.0.1:7000
for connections to forward through the tunnel.

.Bd -literal -offset indent
vaydns-client -doh https://resolver.example/dns-query \e
  -pubkey-file server.pub -domain t.example.com \e
  -listen 127.0.0.1:7000
.Ed

.Pp
Tunnel through the DNS over TLS resolver at
.Cm resolver.example:853 .

.Bd -literal -offset indent
vaydns-client -dot resolver.example:853 \e
  -pubkey 14ca15f5...3d752 -domain t.example.com \e
  -listen 127.0.0.1:7000
.Ed

.Pp
Connect to an original dnstt server using compatibility mode:

.Bd -literal -offset indent
vaydns-client -doh https://resolver.example/dns-query \e
  -dnstt-compat -pubkey-file server.pub \e
  -domain t.example.com -listen 127.0.0.1:7000
.Ed


.Sh DIAGNOSTICS

.Nm
writes running logs to standard error.

At startup,
.Nm
logs the effective MTU, which is the amount of useful payload capacity
in each DNS query after accounting for encoding overhead.
This number varies depending on the domain length,
.Fl max-qname-len ,
and
.Fl dnstt-compat .

.Dl effective MTU 52


.Sh SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS

The
.Fl udp
option is not covert,
and is intended for debugging and special configurations.
Only the
.Fl doh
and
.Fl dot
modes provide protection against detection of the tunnel,
because they encrypt DNS messages between
.Nm
and the recursive resolver.
The
.Fl udp
mode sends plaintext DNS messages,
which reveal the use of a DNS tunnel by their special format.

Even with
.Fl doh
or
.Fl dot ,
it may be possible for an observer to infer
the use of a tunnel
by traffic metadata features such as
traffic volume and timing.
The recursive resolver can see the plaintext of DNS messages
and is always in a position to easily detect the use of a tunnel.

But even if the use of a tunnel is detected, the
.Em contents
of the tunnel remain encrypted and authenticated.
The end-to-end encryption and authentication of the tunnel is a separate layer,
independent of the encryption
provided by DNS over HTTPS or DNS over TLS.


.Sh SEE ALSO

.Xr vaydns-server 1

.Lk https://github.com/net2share/vaydns
