.\" https://man.openbsd.org/mdoc.7
.Dd 2026-03-22
.Dt VAYDNS-SERVER 1
.Os


.Sh NAME

.Nm vaydns-server
.Nd DNS tunnel server


.Sh SYNOPSIS

.Nm
.Fl gen-key
.Op Fl privkey-file Ar FILENAME
.Op Fl pubkey-file Ar FILENAME

.Nm
.Fl udp Ar ADDR : Ns Ar PORT
.Op Fl privkey Ar HEX | Fl privkey-file Ar FILENAME
.Op Fl mtu Ar MTU
.Fl domain Ar DOMAIN
.Fl upstream Ar UPSTREAMADDR : Ns Ar UPSTREAMPORT


.Sh DESCRIPTION

.Nm
is the server portion of a DNS tunnel.
It receives DNS over UDP messages at
.Ar ADDR : Ns Ar PORT ,
decodes the streams they contain,
and forwards the streams as TCP connections to the address given by
.Fl upstream .
.Nm
acts as the authoritative name server for the domain given by
.Fl domain
and communicates with an instance of
.Xr vaydns-client 1
via a recursive resolver.

.Ss GENERATING A SERVER KEYPAIR

The tunnel client
encrypts and authenticates the tunneled connection
using the server's public key.
To generate a server keypair, use the
.Fl gen-key
option.
Use the
.Fl privkey-file
and
.Fl pubkey-file
options to save the generated private key,
public key, or both,
to a file.

.Bl -tag

.It Fl gen-key
Generate a server keypair.

.It Fl privkey-file Ar FILENAME
With
.Fl gen-key ,
save the generated private key to
.Ar FILENAME .

.It Fl pubkey-file Ar FILENAME
With
.Fl gen-key ,
save the generated public key to
.Ar FILENAME .

.El

.Pp
On the server, you only need to store the private key, because
.Nm
can derive the public key from the private key.
The client only needs to have the server's public key
and should not know the server's private key.

.Ss RUNNING THE SERVER

.Bl -tag

.It Fl udp Ar ADDR : Ns Ar PORT
Listen for incoming DNS messages at the given address.
Required.
.Ar PORT
must typically be 53
when operating with a recursive intermediate resolver,
unless you have made some other provision for forwarding
port 53 to
.Ar PORT .

.It Fl domain Ar DOMAIN
Tunnel domain.
Required.

.It Fl upstream Ar ADDR
TCP address to forward tunneled connections to.
Required.

.It Fl privkey Ar HEX
Server private key as a string of 64 hexadecimal digits.

.It Fl privkey-file Ar FILENAME
Read the server private key from
.Ar FILENAME .
The file should contain 64 hexadecimal digits and an
optional trailing newline character.

.It Fl mtu Ar MTU
Never send UDP payloads larger than
.Ar MTU
bytes.
Default:
.Cm 1232 .
Some recursive resolvers only support a maximum of 512.
You will know you need to use this option when you see messages like:
.Dl FORMERR: requester payload size 512 is too small (minimum 1232)

.It Fl idle-timeout Ar DURATION
Session idle timeout.
Sessions with no data within this period are torn down.
Should match the client's
.Fl idle-timeout .
Default:
.Cm 10s
(or
.Cm 2m
with
.Fl dnstt-compat ) .

.It Fl keepalive Ar DURATION
Keepalive ping interval.
Must be less than
.Fl idle-timeout .
Should match the client's
.Fl keepalive .
Default:
.Cm 2s
(or
.Cm 10s
with
.Fl dnstt-compat ) .

.It Fl response-delay Ar DURATION
Maximum time to hold a DNS response open while waiting for downstream
data before sending an empty response.
Default:
.Cm 200ms .

.It Fl response-queue-size Ar N
Pending DNS response queue size.
0 means
.Fl queue-size .
Default:
.Cm 0 .

.It Fl response-workers Ar N
Number of DNS response sender workers.
Default:
.Cm 2 .

.It Fl fallback Ar ADDR
UDP endpoint to forward non-DNS packets to.
If an incoming packet is not a valid DNS message,
it will be forwarded to this address.
This allows another service to share the same UDP port.

.It Fl dnstt-compat
Enable original dnstt wire protocol compatibility.
Uses 8-byte ClientIDs and the padding-aware upstream packet format,
allowing the server to accept connections from original dnstt clients.
Also overrides the following defaults to match dnstt unless explicitly set:
.Fl idle-timeout
to 2m,
.Fl keepalive
to 10s.
When set, the
.Fl clientid-size
option is ignored.

.It Fl clientid-size Ar N
Set the ClientID size in bytes.
Default:
.Cm 2 .
Ignored when
.Fl dnstt-compat
is set.

.It Fl queue-size Ar N
Packet queue size for the DNS tunnel transport.
Default:
.Cm 512 .

.It Fl kcp-window-size Ar N
KCP send and receive window size in packets.
0 means half of
.Fl queue-size .
Default:
.Cm 0 .

.It Fl queue-overflow Ar MODE
Queue overflow behavior:
.Cm drop
or
.Cm block .
Default:
.Cm drop .

.It Fl log-level Ar LEVEL
Log level: debug, info, warning, error.
Default:
.Cm info .

.El

.Pp
If no private key is provided via
.Fl privkey
or
.Fl privkey-file ,
.Nm
generates a temporary keypair on each start
and logs the public key to standard error.


.Sh EXAMPLES

Generate a keypair.
Save the private key to the file
.Cm server.key
and the public key to
.Cm server.pub .
Copy
.Pa server.pub
to the client.

.Bd -literal -offset indent
vaydns-server -gen-key -privkey-file server.key \e
  -pubkey-file server.pub
.Ed

.Pp
Accept DNS messages at the UDP address
.Cm 0.0.0.0:5300 ,
decode the streams contained therein,
and forward the streams as TCP connections to
.Cm 127.0.0.1:8000 .

.Bd -literal -offset indent
vaydns-server -udp 0.0.0.0:5300 -privkey-file server.key \e
  -domain t.example.com -upstream 127.0.0.1:8000
.Ed

.Pp
Accept connections from original dnstt clients:

.Bd -literal -offset indent
vaydns-server -udp 0.0.0.0:5300 -dnstt-compat \e
  -privkey-file server.key -domain t.example.com \e
  -upstream 127.0.0.1:8000
.Ed

.Pp
Forward non-DNS traffic to a fallback service:

.Bd -literal -offset indent
vaydns-server -udp 0.0.0.0:5300 -privkey-file server.key \e
  -fallback 127.0.0.1:8888 -domain t.example.com \e
  -upstream 127.0.0.1:8000
.Ed


.Sh DIAGNOSTICS

.Nm
writes running logs to standard error.

At startup,
.Nm
logs its public key.
This string can be used with the
.Fl pubkey
option in
.Xr vaydns-client 1 .

.Dl pubkey 14ca15f53660e248d289d9302f992c4bee518f2361d6343dafa7b417b5a3d752

.Pp
At startup,
.Nm
logs the effective MTU, which is the amount of useful payload capacity
in each DNS response after accounting for encoding overhead.
This number will vary depending on the length of the
.Fl domain
value and the value of
.Fl mtu .

.Dl effective MTU 932

.Pp
If the recursive resolver's stated maximum UDP payload size
is smaller than
.Fl mtu ,
.Nm
will log a message like this:

.Dl FORMERR: requester payload size 512 is too small (minimum 1232)


.Sh SEE ALSO

.Xr vaydns-client 1

.Lk https://github.com/net2share/vaydns
